Hello, hello, hello, and welcome
to English Learning for Curious
Minds, by Leonardo English, the show
where you can listen to fascinating
stories and learn weird and wonderful
things about the world at the same
time as improving your English.
I'm Alastair Budge, and today we
are kicking off another three-part
mini-series, our last for 2025.
The theme for this month will be “Gli
Anni Di Piombo”, the “Years Of Lead”,
the almost twenty-year period of
post-war Italian history that was marred
by violence, terrorism, and murder.
In part one, today’s episode, we’ll
be talking about the early years,
focussing on the bombing at Milan’s
Piazza Fontana, the search for the
culprits, and its political fallout.
In part two, we’ll talk about the
Red Brigades and the kidnapping
and “people’s trial” of the
former Prime Minister, Aldo Moro.
And in part three, it’ll be the final
years, the bombing of the Bologna
train station, the state crackdown
in its aftermath, and the legacy
this period has on modern Italy.
OK then, let's not waste a
minute and get right into it.
It's easy to romanticise the Italy of
the 1960s: handsome young men with jet
black hair, beautiful women with bright
red lipstick, the hustle and bustle of a
cafe in the morning, the smell of coffee
from the espresso machine, the beeping
horns of mopeds from the streets outside.
And in the afternoon of December the
12th, 1969, some version of this scene
was no doubt being played out up and
down the country, a nation that had
only recently celebrated its 100th
anniversary as one, unified state.
In Milan, Italy’s second-largest
city and industrial centre, it
might have seemed like it would
be an afternoon like any other.
In the headquarters of the Banca
Nazionale dell'Agricoltura, the National
Agricultural Bank, just a stone’s throw
away from Milan’s central cathedral,
the business day was drawing to a close.
It was four-thirty in the afternoon,
but the bank at Piazza Fontana
was still full of customers, with
people from the countryside who
had travelled into the city to do
their business before the weekend.
Many would never make it home.
At 16:37, there was a huge explosion
in the central atrium of the bank.
Fourteen people were killed
instantly, while three more
would die from their wounds.
88 people were injured.
Nobody knew it at the time, but it
would mark the beginning of a nearly
two-decade-long period that would
come to be known as “gli anni di
piombo”, the “years of lead”, two
decades of modern Italian history
that would see an astonishing 14,591
“acts of political violence”, an
average of two every single day.
Now, before we get into the details,
let me add one little disclaimer.
This period is full of mystery and
intrigue; the lines between left and
right are blurred, the Italian state is
not one, single entity, and this is one
of the most controversial and emotive
periods in recent Italian history.
So if there are generalisations,
I hope you will excuse them.
I actually listened to an Italian
podcast about this period, and the
narrator spent the first twenty
minutes giving a very long disclaimer.
This one is shorter, and I won’t
stop every two minutes to say “this
is a generalisation” or to explain
the difference between two slightly
different right-wing groups, as that
would firstly be tedious, and it would
also mean we’d be here for hours.
So, phew, we’ve got that out of the way.
But before we get right into the
years of lead themselves, and to
better understand why Italy lived
through such a tumultuous period, and
for the purposes of today’s episode,
what all started it, we must remind
ourselves of what was happening before.
Italy, let’s remember, was
still a very young country,
little more than 100 years old.
For centuries, it had been a
patchwork of kingdoms and city-states.
Someone from Turin in the north would
most probably have felt more in common
with someone across the border in Geneva
or Nice than with their “fellow” Italian
from Naples or Palermo, in the south.
And when the Kingdom of Italy was
created in 1861, and this collection of
different regions was stitched together
and given the name of Italy, well,
these divides didn’t go away overnight.
The richer, more industrialised
north and the poorer, agrarian south.
The city and the countryside, and
of course, between regions with
centuries of rivalry between them.
Italy was united on a national
level, but significant differences
and divisions remained.
Little more than fifty years into the
creation of Italy came World War I.
And shortly afterwards, Mussolini
and twenty years of Fascism.
For these two decades, the Fascist
Party controlled every aspect of life.
And when Mussolini fell, in
1943, his political ideology
did not disappear with him.
Fascism might have been discredited,
but it certainly did not go away.
It remained like a ghost,
hanging over Italian politics.
And the other important factor, when
it comes to understanding the years of
lead, is what was happening in Italy
at the end of the Second World War.
Italy was initially allied with
Nazi Germany, but switched sides in
1943, surrendering to the Allies.
What this meant was that for the
last two years of the war, the
country was effectively split in two.
In the north, German troops and
the remnants of Mussolini’s fascist
regime fought bitterly against
partisan resistance fighters.
In the south, mostly American and
British Allied soldiers occupied
the country and pushed northwards.
By 1945, peace had returned to Europe, but
Italy was exhausted and deeply divided.
And almost immediately, it found
itself on the front line of
a new conflict: the Cold War.
Italy had the largest Communist
Party in Western Europe, which
was directly supported by Moscow.
But it was also home to powerful
Catholic and conservative forces
that looked in the other direction,
to Washington for protection.
So, for the CIA and the KGB alike, Italy
was not just another European country:
it was an ideological battleground.
And while all of this was playing
out, Italy was changing fast.
In the 1950s and 60s the country
experienced what was called the miracolo
economico, the “economic miracle.”
Millions of Italians left the poor
countryside of the south to work
in the booming industrial north, in
cities like Milan, Turin, and Genoa.
This was the era of Fiat, of the
spaghetti Western, of Sofia Loren
and Federico Fellini, of Italy
becoming a rich, modern state.
Perhaps it’s hard to imagine it as
anything other, but let me give you
some statistics to illustrate quite
how fast and steep this transition was.
In 1955, only 3% of Italians had a fridge
at home, and 1% had a washing machine.
By 1975, the figures were 94% and 76%.
And in a similar period,
average incomes tripled.
It was a huge transformation.
A veritable “miracle”.
But this miracle was uneven.
While some Italians grew
rich, many were left behind.
The South remained poor.
The new urban workers were crammed
into overcrowded neighbourhoods.
They were overworked and underpaid.
Strikes and protests
became part of daily life.
Students occupied universities.
Workers occupied factories.
The autumn of 1969 became known
as “Hot Autumn” and was marked by
protests and strikes for better
pay and working conditions.
Meanwhile, the ghost of fascism
was emerging from the shadows.
The sense of crisis was everywhere.
By the end of the 1960s, Italy was
a country of contradictions: modern
and prosperous on the surface, but
fragile and unstable underneath.
And it was in this Italy — divided,
restless, and full of tension — that
the bombs began to explode.
Indeed, the explosion at the bank in
Milan was not the only bomb that day.
In Rome, three bombs exploded at
almost exactly the same time, with
injuries but fortunately no casualties.
Another was discovered before it went off.
Clearly, this was a coordinated effort.
But, perhaps surprisingly, nobody
claimed responsibility for the attack.
Within hours, investigators announced
that far-left anarchists were to blame.
Leaflets and manifestos from
radical anarchist groups had been
circulating, and the police quickly
rounded up dozens of suspects.
One of them was a 41-year-old railway
worker called Giuseppe Pinelli, who
was a well-known anarchist in Milan.
Pinelli was taken to the
police station for questioning.
But after three days of interrogation,
onlookers would see him crashing out of
the fourth-floor window of the police
headquarters, falling to his death.
The official verdict was initially
that he had committed suicide.
Few bought this, and his death would
become one of the most infamous
episodes of the period, a symbol of
police brutality and the deep mistrust
between the Italian state and the left..
Now, we will return to Pinelli and
what might really have happened in
a few moments, but we must first
move on with this fast-moving story.
The day after Pinelli’s death, the police
announced they had arrested another man.
His name was Pietro Valpreda, and he
was a member of a small anarchist group.
Valpreda protested his innocence and
pointed out that the only evidence
against him was the testimony
of a taxi driver, who said he
had dropped him off at the bank.
The evidence seemed…shaky, at best, but
Valpreda was quickly cast as "the monster
of Piazza Fontana" and thrown into jail.
He had to wait three years for a trial,
then by the time the trial took place,
the only witness against him–the taxi
driver–had died of a heart attack.
Valpreda would spend the best part of
the next two decades in the Italian
judicial system, and it wouldn’t be until
1985–16 years after the attack–that he
was eventually acquitted of all charges.
As you’ll see throughout this
mini-series, the wheels of the Italian
judicial system move very slowly,
and aren’t always very just at all.
So, if Pinelli and Valpreda didn’t
plant the bomb, who did, and why?
Well, it has now been attributed to
a far-right, neo-fascist group called
Ordine Nuovo – New Order, in English.
The possible involvement of this group,
and the fact that it was an attack by
the far-right rather than the far-left,
was something the authorities were aware
of relatively soon after the attack.
But there are accusations
that actors within the police
might have covered this up.
Why?
Why might it have been advantageous for
the bombings to be pinned on the far left?
Well, one theory is that this
was not just a cover-up, but part
of a broader pattern, a way of
using fear to manipulate politics.
By carrying out acts of terrorism against
civilians, and then blaming them on the
left, far-right extremists — sometimes
with the knowledge or protection of
parts of the state — they could frighten
ordinary Italians into demanding
stronger security measures and a
tougher, more authoritarian government.
In the years that followed, this
pattern would appear again and again:
bombings that targeted innocent
people, rushed accusations against
the far left, and investigations
that mysteriously fell apart.
Journalists and magistrates would later
call this la strategia della tensione,
the “strategy of tension”, a campaign of
fear intended to keep Italy from drifting
towards communism and bolstering support
for a stronger, more authoritarian state.
And there is also a broader, international
dimension, linking back to Italy’s
status as a “front line” of the Cold War.
At the end of World War II, there
were secret “stay-behind” NATO
operations set up across Europe, where
operatives were tasked with resisting
in the event of a Soviet invasion.
In Italy, this was called Gladio.
So, its remit was to stay underground,
only emerging if the Red Army
ever crossed the Iron Curtain.
But there are suspicions that Gladio
operatives were a little more active
than they were supposed to be.
In Italy, some of these
networks are suspected of
overlapping with the far right.
As to the extent of these overlaps,
well, some accuse Gladio operatives
of direct collaboration, of helping
far-right terrorists source bombs
and plan attacks, while others accuse
them of simply turning a blind eye.
For what it's worth, the Americans say
they never collaborated with terrorists,
and that this is Soviet disinformation.
What does seem clear is that quite a few
members of far-right groups had pretty
intimate knowledge of the operations
of Gladio, and have suggested that
Gladio operatives tolerated, or even
encouraged, these actions of violence.
It is speculation, and it’s highly
unlikely that the full extent of these
connections will ever come to light.
And on the subject of things never coming
to light, and the murky connections
between the police, the state, and the far
right, we must return to Giuseppe Pinelli,
the railway worker who came crashing out
of the police station window to his death.
As you will remember, the police
initially said it was suicide, but
soon there were conflicting witness
reports, with other officers saying he
had fainted from exhaustion, that he
was near the window and was so tired
after extensive questioning that he
simply fell over, out of the window.
Now, even if this were true, clearly
the police have a responsibility to
anyone in custody to make sure that
they don’t die, so they must bear the
responsibility for Pinelli’s death.
And of course, many didn’t buy this
official accidental verdict, suggesting
instead that Pinelli was either beaten to
death by the police and then thrown out of
the window to make it look like a suicide,
or the police were dangling him out of the
window to try to get him to confess, and
somehow they lost their grip and he fell.
And it wasn’t just general police
mistrust; later autopsies were full
of inconsistencies, suggesting that
Pinelli was likely dead before he hit
the ground, and suggesting he suffered a
serious blow to the neck before he fell.
In other words, he was killed by the
police, and then they threw him out of
the window to try to cover their tracks.
Terrible in any case, and made
even worse when you think about
the fact that Giuseppe Pinelli
shouldn’t have been there.
For starters, there is no evidence
he had anything to do with
the bombing; he was innocent.
And secondly, Italian law says
that the police can hold a suspect
for 48 hours without charge.
After that, they have to be either
charged with a crime or released.
Pinelli had been held for 3 days, way
past the legal maximum, which indicates
that police might have taken to even more
extreme measures to force a confession.
And this case gets even murkier still
when you hear that the police officer
who was responsible for Pinelli’s arrest
and interrogation, a man called Luigi
Calabresi, was himself murdered in 1972,
two and a half years after Piazza Fontana.
His murder would be claimed by far-left
activists as revenge for Pinelli’s,
but there are theories that he was
actually murdered by the far-right,
or even state elements, as he was
one person who knew “the truth”.
Now, when talking about much of
the Years of Lead, it is hard
not to get too pulled in to these
webs of conspiracies and theories.
After all, there is an abundance
of evidence that elements of the
Italian secret services had obstructed
investigations, hidden evidence,
and even protected suspects.
Files went missing.
Witnesses gave contradictory testimony.
Judges complained of being misled
by the very police and intelligence
services meant to help them.
Not just after Piazza Fontana,
but throughout the Years of Lead.
Some officers were later convicted,
not for planting bombs themselves,
but for covering up who really had.
As to their motivations, the links
they may or may not have had to
politicians, foreign powers, even
organised criminals, that is a
subject that is still debated today.
What is clear is that the Piazza Fontana
bombing, and the subsequent years
of carnage that it unleashed, would
be deeply destabilising for Italy.
This strategy of tension, as it
would later be called, worked,
or at least, it created a
hostile, frightening environment.
The images of the destroyed bank
atrium shocked Italians: shattered
glass, broken marble, bloodstains
on the floor where customers had
been waiting only moments before.
And the victims were not
politicians or police officers.
They weren’t even political activists
or protestors; they were ordinary
men and women, farmers who had come
in from the countryside to deposit
their savings, workers finishing up
their business on a Friday afternoon.
In a country that was already on
edge, the message was terrifying:
if you could be killed simply by
walking into a bank in the centre
of Milan, then nowhere was safe.
And Piazza Fontana was only the beginning.
Over the next decade, bombs
would go off in trains, in public
squares, at police headquarters.
Some were carried out by the far left, but
an overwhelming majority by the far right.
Hundreds of Italians would die,
thousands would be injured, and entire
generations would grow up in a country
where violence was part of daily life.
But perhaps the most famous and most
shocking episode of all was still to
come: the kidnapping and murder of
the former Prime Minister, Aldo Moro.
And that, my friends, is
where we will go in part two.
OK, then, that is it for today's
episode on the Piazza Fontana bombing.
As a quick reminder, this is part one
of a three-part mini-series on the
years of lead, gli anni di piombo.
Next up will be the Red Brigades and
the kidnapping of Aldo Moro, and in
part three, it’ll be the bombing of the
Bologna train station, and the legacy
this dark period has left on the country.
You've been listening to English Learning
for Curious Minds by Leonardo English.
I'm Alastair Budge, you stay safe, and
I'll catch you in the next episode.